>> Maximiliano Firtman: Let's go to Code,
and let's write our first service worker.
So first, to create a service worker,
a service worker is just a file,
so just a new file.
I will call that file serviceworker.js.
It's a JavaScript file, okay?
And then will say console.log
I'm a service worker,
>> Maximiliano Firtman: Ready to serve,
whatever, okay?
It's just some code.
So, how can I include that file?
Well, I can go to my index.html and
add a script tag, but
that's not how you register
a service worker, okay?
It's just a normal script, so
that's not how that works.
What I need to do is, I can write a script
here, or I can create another script and
write it there.
It doesn't matter.
navigator.serviceWorker, be
careful with capital W,
.register, and
we pass the name of the file.
This is really important
by default the scope
of the service worker is
the folder in which it's defined,
which means don't do this,
don't create a folder,
scripts, and put the file there.
If you do that,
then the scope will be the scripts folder.
So we'll responsible for
that folder only, okay, make sense?
That's a common error,
a common mistake that you make initially.
So now, typically,
the service worker goes to the root.
I mean, you can override that, but
it's kind of complicated, it doesn't matter.
It's one file, and that's all.
By the way, if you wanna use ES module,
ECMAScript module, by default,
it's not a module, so
you cannot import from other files.
It's a worker, so
you can use importScripts API,
I'm not sure if you have used that before.
But this is a web worker API,
so it's been there for a while.
But it's not really ES modules.
If you wanna use ES module or
treat that JavaScript as a module,
when you register that,
you have to add another argument and
you say type: "module",
>> Maximiliano Firtman: Like that,
or I did It didn't close
the string like that, okay?
So in that case, now that service worker,
it will be treated as
an ECMAScript module, and
it can import from other modules, okay?
No need for today's sample, okay?
I was just showing you the idea.
I will just comment that.
I mean, it's not gonna make
any difference, but anyway.
So, is just that?
Just that?
Are we ready?
If I go to localhost:3000,
I don't see any difference, okay?
If I inspect and go to the console, well,
I'm getting an error for favicon,
which is okay, it's not a problem.
[LAUGH] But here, it says,
I'm a service worker ready to serve.
So somehow it appeared.
But something even better is
to go to the Application tab.
And we already know the Manifest section,
there is another section for
service workers.
And here, you can see that
the service worker 16,005 and
is activated and running.
And this is my service worker.
So now,
I have a separate thread that can see all
the network requests that I'm doing and
I can also serve assets.
So now, something interesting
that I have here in the service
worker debugging section is that
I do have an offline simulator.
So instead of turning off the WiFi or
turning off the server, I can click here,
Offline, refresh and see what happens.
So is it offline capable?
No, look at that.
That's my default offline new
page that Chrome is implemented.
You are offline, okay?
We don't see, unfortunately,
I'm sorry little, you're gone.
I mean, you have your days counted,
but at least you have that, okay?
But it's not working offline then.
I mean, I'm getting something, yeah, I'm
getting something better than before, but
the website is not working offline, okay?
I'm getting a better response.
So now, if i even open the the app from
here, but this was the previous loading.
Let me open it up again, so this is what
you see, okay, but I think it was a bug.
For a second,
I thought we had just found a bug.
But the app is not really available
offline, because something important for
the service workers is that they
don't do anything automatically.
So yeah, I have a service worker,
I have a thread, but
it's just sitting ducks there,
it's doing nothing.
I need to manually write
my service worker.
So that's why you should
first cache the resources.
So the service worker has a local cache,
it's called the cache storage API.
We can cache all or
some of the reasons you pick, okay?
Everything is based in
JavaScript promises.
Typically, we prefetch on installation,
so we can wait for
the service worker to be installed,
and we prefetch the assets.
Okay, I need this image.
I need the CSS, I need this HTML, and
then we can also cache on request.
So you know what?
I'm not going to cache anything.
When the web app needs something,
I will go to a network and
make a copy of that for next time.
Okay, so different patterns that we
have available for caching files.
And this is known as
the app shell pattern.
It's a design pattern where when
you install a PWA, you go and
grab all the assets that
will render the app shell.
If you're using Angular, for
example, Angular supports PWAs.
There is a plug-in in Angular,
I'm not sure.
For those of you that know Angular,
you know what I'm talking about.
It's a schematic actually,
you can add a PWA schematic,
and there is another one for
the app shell.
So then you can create the app shell that
then the service worker that Angular
creates will download all the assets to
render the shell without the data, okay?
It's just that.
And then you need to
serve those resources.
In the service worker, we respond for
every request that PWA make,
every request.
In fact, let me prove that.
Before actually making a service
worker that actually works,
let's add something else here.
I'm going to add this.
First, the service worker
is not the window.
Let me prove that.
It doesn't have access
to the user interface.
Let's refresh here.
So for example, if I say this here is the
window, okay, you have probably seen that.
But I'm not sure if you know,
when you are executing code in DevTools,
you have a selector here where
you can select another context.
For example, I have the service
worker that is currently activated.
So I can go now to that thread and I can
execute now code under the serviceWorker.
And that's the serviceWorkerGlobalScope.
If I try to make an alert,
hello, it doesn't work.
It says, I don't know what an alert is.
Because I'm in the serviceWorker,
it has no UI.
If I go back to top, of course it works.
So you can change the execution
context based on that, okay?
So, what we can do is we can add
an event listener called fetch.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: I'm attaching
this to the global object that here is
called "self".
Or now with ECMAScript,
you can use globalThis.
If you don't know about globalThis,
you can check Professional JS
course in Frontend Masters,
where we cover all the latest stuff in
ECMAScript, where we cover globalThis.
But if not, you can use "self".
So I can say, console.log File request.
Well, actually, more than file,
HTTP requested.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: So now,
first, before actually reloading,
what do you think that will
happen with the serviceWorker?
Will take my new service worker, because
the service worker is already installed?
>> Student: You have to disable
the cache in the browser.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: But
you will see what I need to do.
But first, it's important to see
if you understand the problem.
The serviceWorker is always
installed in users devices.
So if you change it's server side,
by default, it's not going to take it.
It's using the old one, okay?
It's like my iPhone,
where I don't update my apps.
I still have the old one.
It doesn't matter if you
change it in the app store.
So, there is an update process,
an update algorithm for the serviceWorker.
Actually, what will happen is that
when you open the app next time or
when you reload, it will check in
the server and download the serviceWorker.
The browser is doing that, and
it will check byte by byte.
So it will do a byte by byte comparison
with the serviceWorker that is
installed to see if it's is new one.
If it's a new one,
it's not going to push this one, okay?
This one will be installed and
it will be waiting for be activated,
because this one is already active,
the old one.
And in the current navigation,
the old one is in charge.
But when you close the app, 40 seconds
has passed and this one is discarded.
The next time, the new one is going to
be the one that be activated, okay?
I'm just simplifying here a little bit
this, because service worker is a complex
concept, so it takes time, but just to
give you quick ideas of what's going on.
That happens unless you
have the DevTools open
with this check mark checked,
update on reload.
When you hit update on reload then this
algorithm that i explained is not gonna
happen.
You refresh, the service worker
will refresh as well, immediately.
But that's not what will happen in
the real world with real users, okay?
Make sense?
So now if I refresh, I go to the Console,
I'm a service worker, ready to serve.
And now I see nothing.
Why I'm not seeing nothing?
Because it's already registered.
So nothing happens,
because it's already registered, okay?
And now, 6 HTTP files were requested.
Can you see that?
Yes, okay,
can I see which files were requested?
Well, the event,
I can convert this into a template string.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: It has request and
the request has a URL.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: Okay, so
if I refresh, it's not taking this.
But now, look at this,
it says this and then this,
because the new one takes
time to be registered.
Degunning service worker takes
time because you have the old one,
the one that is in memory,
then you refresh,
it's trying to replace the other one,
so there is a life cycle going on.
It's not so simple, so direct as before.
Sometimes they say,
you need to refresh again.
In the Application tab,
you can go here to Service Worker and
you can see that even if you refresh,
there is one that is waiting to activate.
So I'm still working with the old one,
because it's in memory.
Does it make sense?
So it's in memory, so
it's not killing the process.
So unless i hit here, Skip waiting and
now the new one is in place.
Does it make sense?
So it's a complex thing
that you need to try here.
So now, if I refresh, finally,
I'm seeing the request.
And look at this,
this is really interesting,
because I'm seeing all the requests.
And you can see that
it's requesting app.js,
but it's also requesting PWA compat,
that is not really my domain.
So the service worker,
the proxy, it's also seen,
requests that are going somewhere else,
and
that was actually part of the diagram
that we saw before, this one.
So the service worker is seeing
not just my server's request, but
also requests to other places,
okay, and it can reply.
That's the important part in
the name of those servers as well.
How?
I'm going to do this quickly.
This is not a real code,
it's just for testing purposes.
Event has a method,
respond with, respond with.
It accepts an HTTP response or
a promise of a response, okay?
So that means I can
create a new response and
the body of that response can be,
hey, hehe.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: So
now, I'm responding, actually,
to every request with that response.
I'm kind of Express.js here,
so I'm a server now.
I'm creating an HTTP response,
okay, client side.
Because it's a JavaScript client side,
so I don't have Node.js here.
So first, if I refresh,
I'm still not seeing that, because again,
we have the same problem as we saw before,
okay?
We have one waiting for activate.
You can always go to Storage also and
clear everything that will clear
service workers and blah, blah, blah.
But if not, you can skipWaiting, refresh.
And now, I see, hey, hehe,
I'm not even seeing the HTML anymore.
And what about if I try other URL?
Just the same.
Why it's not giving me 404?
Because now the service
worker is in charge.
The service worker is taking
every request to its scope,
which is localhost:3000, and
answering the same thing.
And we can go to the network layer,
the Network tab, refresh, and
let's go to all here, and
I can see the request with the headers.
I'm requesting this.
Here, you can see the status code.
Hey,
you know what?
It wasn't the real server.
It was a service worker, but
it's kind of a metadata hidden there.
It's still a response where
I have all the headers.
I have the response headers, and
of course,
I can customize from the service worker.
But from a network point of view,
it was the server that answered that.
Quick trick, when you reload,
if you press your Shift key, so
Shift+Reload will bypass the service
worker, just's for that reload.
Shift+Reload, I reload service worker.
Shift+Reload, no service worker, okay?
So that's a quick way to,
when you are testing,
you can bypass the service worker quickly.
So you can see that the service
worker is a serious thing.
You can break your website with one line.
One line of wrong service worker code,
and your website is broken.
I cannot even browse my website anymore.
>> Student: More of a curiosity question.
It kind of seems like it's an app-level
client implemented forward proxy.
Have you seen in the wild
service workers being used for
non-PWA purposes,
inspecting from the browser
outgoing requests, or like-
>> Maximiliano Firtman: I mean, you can,
but you can also do it in the main thread.
So I mean, it's not a security risk,
but you can log every request.
You can add a security layer.
The service worker for
performance reasons is being used a lot.
There are a lot of tricks and
design patterns on the web performance
field that can help you with that.
But yeah, but not initially,
okay, with that in mind.